{% import "macros/ork.jinja" as ork with context %}
Lecture 01
*******************

Introduction to Statistics
===============================


What is statistics?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Statistics is the science of drawing conclusion from data.

It's about asking a question, gathering data related to the question, exploring the data, analysing the data, then drawing conclusions based on the data. Hopefully the data helps you to answer the original question.

I call all of this the process of *statistical storytelling*. This course is the first step in becoming a data explorer, searching the unknown for information that you can share with others.  You will become an informed user of numerical information.


Why study statistics?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each and every one of us has contributed to statistics. 

* If you were ever born, your parents likely received a birth certificate from a medical organization. That organization tallied how many babies were born on a certain day in a certain geographic region, and report that to other medical organizations. This information contributes to the census, which is an important component for assessing a nation's overall health and well-being.

* If you were ever pulled over while driving and issued a speeding ticket, the police officer reported to his or her department that the total number of speeders for the day should be increased by 1. Recording the number of speeding tickets issued per day over the course of months or years, police departments can recommend where stoplights, speed bumps, or other speed-regulating tools should be placed for public safety.

* If you use Facebook and ever Like anything, Facebook uses information about you to assemble a demographic about the sorts of people who Liked that particular content, to help make targeted advertising more effective and thus increasing Facebook's profit.

Learning how statistics 'works' is increasingly important as our world invests more reliance on digital technologies, including computers and the Internet. We're awash with so much data -- Likes, tweets, click-through rates, births, deaths, campaign donations, :math:`\sf CO_2` emissions, football passing rates, Nielson T.V. ratings, religious conversion rates, government surveillance reports, and so much more. It's truly astounding what can be measured. And if it's measurable, statistics is critical for understanding what the measurements may be able to tell us.

An understanding of statistics will help you make data-driven decisions and, importantly, how to spot if someone is accidentally misleading you or intentionally abusing statistics for his or her own gain.


Statistics... and math
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The biggest comment I hear is that statistics is a math course.  Statistics is not a math course.  However, statistics *uses* math, like most every other field of study. 

* Chemists use math. If I have three molecules of :math:`\sf H_2 O`, how many atoms of hydrogen do I have?
* Sociologists use math. If it's estimated that 5% of high school students identify as 'goth', and there are 14.8 million public high school students in the United States [1]_, how many goths are in our public high schools?
* A student working at McDonald's uses math. If I get paid $7/hour and I work 30 hours, how much do I make?

Statistics uses mathematics to build tools, which, in turn, we use to slice and dice data to get a better understanding of something. We won't invest much time in understanding the ins and outs of complex formulas. If that's your thing, there is plenty of literature available on the web to tickle your fancy.

The math we'll be using is mostly algebra. I'm here to help if you're struggling.
	

How this course is arranged
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This course is divided into three units.

1. Data analysis
#. Probability
#. Inferential statistics

Lets take a look at what questions we can answer after studying each unit, in reverse order.

**Unit 3. Inferential statistics**

* How do scientists figure out whethe something is good for you?
* How do polls make accurate predictions based on data from only a small percent of voters?

Inferential statistics is about making conclusions based on data from samples, using a knowledge of probability.


**Unit 2. Probability**

* If my last four lotter tickets all lost, is the next one more likely to be a winning ticket?
* What should we expect to happend "just by chance"?

Probability is about understanding and quantifying randomness and change.


**Unit 1. Data analysis**

* How do I make sense of a large dataset?

Data analysis is about gathering, displaying, and summarizing data.


Resources for this course
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By now, you've probably noticed that there is no required deadtree book for this course. This is for several reasons:

Primary reason: It's an experiment of your learning experience. (Your input throughout the course is appreciated.)
Secondary reasons: 

* There is a growing set of online resources available to you. The free, online-only book upon which this course most relies is *SticiGui* (strange title...), located at `www.stat.berkeley.edu/~stark/SticiGui/Text/toc.htm <http://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~stark/SticiGui/Text/toc.htm>`_. There will also be references to other materials, such as the book I'm writing, entitled `Learn Stats in 10,000 Hours <http://learnstats.org>`_ (equally strange title, but in a different way...). You will have early access to the book for this course (it's not done yet).
* Your out-of-pocket expense is significantly reduced.

Despite this course's focus on digital books, there are two dead-tree books I recommend you pick up through interlibrary loan or for purchase.

* `How to Lie with Statistics <http://www.amazon.com/How-Lie-Statistics-Darrell-Huff/dp/0393310728?tag=651998669-20>`_, by Darrell Huff and Irving Geis.
* `The Cartoon Guide to Statistics <http://www.amazon.com/Cartoon-Guide-Statistics-Larry-Gonick/dp/0062731025?tag=651998669-20>`_, by Larry Gonick and Woollcott Smith.

These are classics and are not filled with the usual academic droll. Get them if you can.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. [1] source: `National Center for Education Statistics. <http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=372>`_
