{% import "macros/ork.jinja" as ork with context %}

Lecture 03: Measures of Position, with Percentiles
*******************************************************

Here is a list of data points:
	
	7, 2, 7, 4, 0 

Arranged in increasing order:
	
	0, 2, 4, 7, 7

The **median**, the middlemost data point, is 4.

Here is a new list:

	0, 2, 4, 7, 7, 12

What is the median now?  It is somewhere between 4 and 7. So lets just take the **midpoint**, which is :math:`\sf\frac{4+7}{2} = 5.5`.


What is a percentile?
==============================

A **percentile** is a numerical summary of quantitative data. Since that definition probably didn't clarify things for you, lets look at an example.

We've all taken plenty of standardized tests, which rely on percentiles to tell you how well you performed on the test, relative to everyone else who took the same test.

If you are placed in the 95th percentile of test scores, that means that:

- 95% of students had lower scores than you...
- ...and 5% of students had higher scores than you.

There are three famous percentiles:

- 25th percentile = **lower quartile**
- 50th percentile = **median**
- 75th percentile = **upper quartile**

To revise the definition given at the beginning of this section, the :math:`p\text{th}` percentile of a list of numbers is the smallest number that is at least as large as :math:`p\%` of the list.

Back to our list of data
============================

Find the 25th percentile of this list:

	0, 2, 4, 7, 7, 12

- ``0`` is the first data value in a group of six. So 0 is :math:`\sf \frac{1}{6} = 16.67\%` of the way into the list. That means 0 is at least as large as 16.67% of the list. But it is not at least as large as 25% of the list.
- ``2`` is :math:`\sf \frac{2}{6} = 33.33\%` of the way into the list. It is definitely at least as large as 25% of the list. Therefore, the 25th percentile = ``2``.
- ``4`` is :math:`\sf \frac{3}{6} = 50\%` of the way into the list. It is definitely at least as large as 25% of the list, *but it is not the smallest number with that property!* Recall that ``2`` = 25th percentile.

The steps for determining the percentile are:

1. Arrange list in order.
#. Identify the place that is :math:`p\%` of the way from the bottom of the list.
#. If that is a place on the list, use the number in that place. Otherwise, take the next number up.

So lets try it again:

	0, 2, 4, 7, 7, 12

*Find the median.*
50% of the way into the list is :math:`\sf 0.5 * 6 = 3` places, so the median = ``4``. Compare with the "conventional" median of 5.5. They are not the same!

*40th percentile*
:math:`\sf 0.4 * 6 = 2.4`. Take the 3rd entry. 40th percentile = ``4``

*Check*
Ensure that the 60th, 70th, and 80th percentiles all equal ``7``.


