{% import "macros/ork.jinja" as ork with context %}
Measures of Location - Mean and Median
*******************************************

Summary Statistics
===============================

It is time to venture into the world of formulas. Do not freak out. It's time to get simple measurements of the crudest characteristics of a set of data.

Any set of measuremenst has two important properties:

- The **central or typical value**, and
- the **spread** about the value.

][[[] 2 diff histos ]]

A little notation
=====================

We can go far with a little notation. Lets say we are making a series of observations... :math:`n` of them, to be precise. [#]_ 

Since we're making :math:`n` observations, we can write each individual observation as

.. math::

	x_1, x_2, x_3, \dots x_n

You can pronounce these as "x-one, x-two...".

Thus, :math:`n` is the total number of data points, and :math:`x_4` (lets say) is the value of the fourth data point. We can arrange this data in an **array**:

============	===========	===========	===========	===========	===========
observation 	1       	2       	3       	4       	5  
============	===========	===========	===========	===========	===========
data value  	:math:`x_1`	:math:`x_2`	:math:`x_3`	:math:`x_4`	:math:`x_5`
============	===========	===========	===========	===========	===========


A set of :math:`n = 7` data points makes organization easy. Suppose we are observing how many hours of exercise five people get in a week. We may have the following array:

============	===========	===========	===========	===========	===========
observation 	1       	2       	3       	4       	5  
============	===========	===========	===========	===========	===========
data value  	5          	3          	7          	38         	7          
============	===========	===========	===========	===========	===========

Then :math:`x_1 = 5`, :math:`x_2 = 3`, :math:`x_3 = 7`, :math:`x_4 = 38` (yikes!), and :math:`x_5 = 7`.

How do we figure out the "center" of this data?  There are several ways.


Mean (or "average")
=======================

The **mean** or average value is represented by :math:`\overline{x}` ("x-bar").  It is obtained by adding all the data and dividing by the number of observations.

.. math::
	
	\begin{split}
		\overline{x} &= \frac{\text{sum of data}}{n} \\
		&= \frac{x_1 + x_2 + \dots + x_n}{n}
	\end{split}

For our example,

.. math::
	
	\begin{split}
	\overline{x} &= \frac{5+3+7+38+7}{5} \\
	&= \frac{60}{5} \\
	&= 12 \text{ hours}
	\end{split}

A mathematical aside...
-------------------------------

There is a shorthand for sequences like :math:`x_1 + x_2 + \dots + x_n`. It uses the Greek capital letter :math:`\Sigma` ("sigma") to indicate summation. For the sum :math:`x_1 + x_2 + \dots + x_n` we write :math:`\sum\limits_{i=1}^n x_i`, which is read as "the sum of :math:`x_i` as :math:`i` goes from 1 to :math:`n`." You'll see this used throughout statistics literature, so memorize it.

Now that we have seen strange symbols and equations, this is starting to look like a true statistics course.

Lets use our new knowledge.

Back to the mean
----------------------
The average, or mean, of a set of data :math:`x_i` is

.. math::
	
	\overline{x} = \frac{\sum\limits_{i=1}^n x_i}{n} \text{ or, to simplify a bit, } \sum\limits_{i=1}^n \frac{x_i}{n}

Think back to the previous lecture that talked about the weights of Penn State students. There were 92 students. Thus, the mean weight is :math:`\sum\limits_{i=1}^{92} \frac{x_i}{92} = \frac{13,354}{92} = 145.15 \text{ pounds.}`

Median
=========

To borrow an analogy from Gonick's and Smith's `The Cartoon Guide To Statistics <http://www.amazon.com/Cartoon-Guide-Statistics-Larry-Gonick/dp/0062731025?tag=651998669-20>`_, the median of a data set is similar to a *median strip* that runs down the center of a paved road. You've seen the median before, when you learned that it serves double-duty as the *50th percentile.*

To recap, if you have the following data:

	3, 5, 7, 7, 38

The median is ``7`` (the first one). It's the middlemost value. If the number of points is *even*, in which there is no exact middle value, then take the average of the two values closest to the middle.

The median of 3, 5, 7, and 7 is....  :math:`\frac{5+7}{2} = 6.`

Lets find the median of the student weight data. For the :math:`n = 92` student weights, the median can be found from the stem-and-leaf diagram. Since 92 is an even number, we're going to have to take the average of two vaules. Count to the 46th and 47th observations.

=====	==	===========================================
Stem 	:	Leaves
=====	==	===========================================
9    	:	5
10   	:	288
11   	:	002556688
12   	:	00012355555
13   	:	0000013555688
14   	:	00002555 :math:`\textbf{55}` 8
15   	:	0000000000355555555557
16   	:	000045
17   	:	000055
18   	:	0005
19   	:	000005
20   	:	
21   	:	5
=====	== 	===========================================

Perform the calculation:

.. math::

	\frac{x_{46} + x_{47}}{2} = \frac{145 + 145}{2} = 145 \text{ pounds}


Differences between mean and median
==========================================

So we have two tools for measuring the center of data: *mean* and *median*. Each has advantages. For example, the median is not sensitive to **outliers**, which are extreme values that are not typical of the rest of the data. Suppose in our small exercise group (from earlier in this lecture), one person claims to exercise *200 hours* per week. Then our data are 3, 5, 7, 7, 38, 200. The median, ``7``, is unchanged, but the mean is now :math:`\overline{x} = 43.3`!

Sometimes, it's enticing to use the mean, instead of median, to stretch the truth a bit. Actually, sometimes the mean can stretch the truth a lot. In 1984, The University of Virginia claimed that its Department of Rhetoric and Communications graduates' mean starting salary was $55,000 (and this was 30 years ago!). U.V. didn't mention that the mean was stretched high by one outstanding outlier, the salary of NBA center Ralph Sampson. His salary was not representive of the expected starting salary of speech graduates from the University of Virginia. The median salary was never published.



------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. [#] I am using :math:`n` as a variable, a *placeholder* for some specific number that we aren't worried about. (At least not yet.)